Title: A Few Theses on Blogging
Subtitle: (Twelve, to be precise.)
Author: Chris Krycho
Date: 2014-07-09 21:15
Tags: listicles
Summary: Twelve thoughts&mdash;only loosely connected&mdash;on writing blog posts consisting simply of a series of loosely connected thoughts.

I am a habitually---even chronically---long-winded blogger. I always have been.
I sat down a few weeks ago to write up an explanation of my running approach,
and I haven't finished it yet... because it is over 2,500 words long and growing
rapidly longer. But as I have considered my approach to blogging of late, and as
I have also been posting fairly regularly on App.net (my social media locale of
choice), it occurred to me:

 1. Blog posts do not have to be the lengthy things I usually make of them.
 2. I often write up a series of thoughts---not necessarily an "argument" or
    indeed anything more than a series of connected thoughts---on App.net,
    connecting them via the 'reply' mechanism and enumerating them. Rather like
    I am here.
 3. Doing so inevitably clutters up the streams of anyone following me.
 4. That clutter may or may not be problematic: some folks may enjoy those
    connected thoughts. Others may not.
 5. For those that *do* enjoy those connected thoughts, a blog post like this
    would probably serve just as well.
 6. For those who do *not* enjoy them... well, this sort of thing would be a
    welcome way to clear their streams up without causing me any particular
    difficulty.
 7. Using lists does not automatically mean I have given in to the constant
    temptation to make my blogging about driving views.
 8. Seriously.
 9. This blog will *never* drive substantial amounts of traffic. That is fine by
    me. Indeed, I would probably feel a bit odd if it did.
10. Therefore, when I have those sorts of thoughts-in-a-line in the future, I
    will do as I have done here. I will write a 'listicle' (the shame!) and
    share it for others to partake of---or not!---as they please.
11. Taking that approach will almost certainly free me up to blog more briefly
    when I feel like it, as well. That, too, can only be a good thing.
12. After all: I am happier when I am writing.[^12]

[^12]: As I have so often [noted before](http://www.chriskrycho.com/2014/the-long-race.html)...