Title: Adam's Sin and Our Death
Author: Chris Krycho
Class: Christian Theology II
Professor: Dr. Steve McKinion
School: Southeastern Baptist Theological Seminary
Date: 2014-03-05 15:00
Category: theology
Tags: [M. Div., SEBTS]
Summary: How exactly human beings' guilt relates to Adam's guilt is a question of no small theological import, and it has unsurprisingly been the topic of much theological discussion---not to say debate---over the past many hundreds of years.
Template: formats/class

How exactly human beings' guilt relates to Adam's guilt is a question of no
small theological import, and it has unsurprisingly been the topic of much
theological discussion---not to say debate---over the past many hundreds of
years. The central passage is Romans 5:12--14:

> Therefore, just as sin came into the world through one man, and death through
> sin, and so death spread to all men because all sinned---for sin indeed was in
> the world before the law was given, but sin is not counted where there is no
> law. Yet death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over those whose sinning was
> not like the transgression of Adam, who was a type of the one who was to come.

The basic historic, orthodox[^1] views of this position may be summarized as
follows:

[^1]: I leave aside non-orthodox positions such as the Pelagian view that people
are born able to live perfectly righteous lives, with uncorrupted natures, which
runs against the clear teaching of Scripture that all sin and moreover that all
*inevitably* sin because of the fallenness of our humanity.

- All humans are guilty of Adam's sin because they were in his loins when he
  sinned, and so have not only been contaminated with his sinful nature but also
  actively sinned when he sinned, and so are guilty and under judgment of death
  from their very conception---a position most famously and forcefully
  articulated by Augustine.
- All humans are born guilty of Adam's sin because he acted as the federal head
  of the human race and so we are imputed guilty in him, just as when we
  partipate in the humanity of the new federal head of humanity---Jesus
  Christ---his righteousness is imputed to us. In this view, humans are born
  subject to the punishment of sin (including death) because all of us are
  *counted* guilty in Adam, just as we experience the blessings of holiness
  when in Christ because we are *counted* righteous in him (the historic
  Reformed view).
- All humans are born innocent of Adam's guilt, but by dint of descent from him
  have the same corrupted sinful nature he did, and therefore all *do* sin and
  incur guilt before a holy God. Furthermore, as Adam's descendants, all are
  born separated from God and therefore mortal. In this view, humans are born
  innocent of guilt but inevitably sin because of their fallen humanity and die
  because of their separation from God. This is the view articulated by the
  Baptist Faith and Message 2000.

The most basic logic of the passage seems to run most closely in line with this
last articulation. Paul argues that "sin came into the world through one man,
and death through sin, and so death spread to all men because all sinned". While
Augustine and the Reformers both took this latter phrase to mean "all sinned *in
Adam*" it must be recognized that the idea that all sinned "in Adam" is foreign
to the text. Indeed, the sentence that follows immediately on the heels of this
first declaration suggest that it is individuals' sins committed in their own
lives, and not Adam's sin, that is in view here. Otherwise, the distinction
between the sins that some committed before the law came and the sins that
others committed after the law came makes little sense. So likewise does the
distinction between Adam's sin and that of those who followed him, even those
whose sin was not like his.

The most significant textual challenge to this understanding comes in Paul's
statement that "death spread to all men because all sinned"---a statement that
is hard to reconcile with the notion of the lack of conscious sin in infants or
the mentally handicapped. Certainly many humans die in infancy, and indeed many
die *in utero* long before the cognitive ability to make any choice whatsoever
has developed. Thus, there is at least some sense in which Paul's argument
entails the death of human beings who have not yet come under condemnation for
their own sin because of Adam's sin.

None of the views outlined above resolve this tension perfectly. The Augustinian
view seems overly bound up in Augustine's views on sexual intercourse as the
means of the transmission of sin to human nature. The federal headship view
places more emphasis on the idea of imputation than this passage seems to
support, but deals forthrightly with the issue of death in the lives of those
who have committed no sins. The idea that humans are born innocent of specific
guilt but subject to a sin nature that leads inevitably to sin seems to do
justice to the basic flow of Paul's argument, but struggles with the
application of death to those who have not sinned.

Integrating the latter two options seems the best solution. People die because
Adam corrupted human nature, and all participate in his corrupted human
nature---a nature separated from the fellowship with God essential to human
immortality---unless united to a *different* human nature. People are guilty
for their own sins, not for Adam's, but they die because they share Adam's
basic nature, which came out of his guilt. In due time, they themselves sin
they *earn* the death in which they already shared by dint of their broken
humanity. Even this solution, it must be admitted, remains somewhat messier
than we might like, but it is to be preferred as best dealing with all the
evidence before us.