Title: Choose Your Hobby
Subtitle: Note the Singular; Mine is Running
Author: Chris Krycho
Date: 2014-06-18
Tags: fitness

We have hit a new phase of life, what with adorable little Kate in the house and
thus even more time devoted to child-rearing than before. It's what in my own
head I've started calling the one-hobby phase.

At earlier points in my life, I had time for many hobbies. I could work on
software, write at length, get in my fitness time, and still have a few hours
left over to watch a TV show or play video games with Jaimie. Not so much
anymore. These days, I get one hobby *on a consistent basis*. I can indulge in
others from time to time, when we have breaks in our normal routine or schedule,
but in terms of regular activities outside of work, chores, and so on, I have
time to do only one thing well.

I made my choice without even really thinking about it. I *run*.

The choice was easy for a lot of reasons. Running is a good change of pace for
me (no pun intended): whereas all my other work during the day tends to be
cerebral and physically static, it gets me moving and doesn't require a lot of
thought at all. Of course, being the nerd I am, I do plenty of thinking on my
runs, but that thinking is quite different from the thinking I do when writing
software or plowing through seminary coursework. Running decreases stress levels
and increases my energy. It gets me outside, breathing fresh air instead of
sitting inside staring at a computer screen or the pages of a book. It helps me
keep my weight at a healthy level and keeps my body in good condition in ways
that, Lord willing, will serve me well for the rest of my life. It lets me eat a
*lot* of good food along the way.

As I said: it wasn't even really a choice. It was instead something of a
realization. If I had to let go of every hobby but one, this one stayed. In
fact, it took me a while to realize that this "hobby" had stuck when all the
others had faded from prominence, because unlike my writing, composing, and
on-the-side software projects, running stopped being a hobby for me a long time
ago. It is just a non-negotiable part of my life. It is *flexible*, but
non-negotiable: I take time off when I need it, or when Jaimie needs it, or when
Ellie or Kate need it. I give my body the rest it needs. I don't worry for a
moment if I don't get a run in that I had planned, or I had to go shorter than I
wanted, or "lose" a week because I get a nasty cold---not least because I know
I'll be right back out there soon enough, knocking out the miles.

If I only get to have one regular hobby at this phase of life, running seems a
good one to have chosen. Who could argue with a hobby that lets you eat more ice
cream?