---
Title: Further Upward and Further In
Summary: The Christian life  the life of growing sanctification&mdash;increasing in Christlikeness and so in humanity as it was meant to be.
Author: Chris Krycho
Date: 2014-04-29 08:15
Topic: What does it mean to be "sanctified"?
Category: Theology
Tags: [M. Div., SEBTS]
Class: Christian Theology II
Professor: Dr. Steve McKinion
School: Southeastern Baptist Theological Seminary
Template: formats/class
---

Humanity was meant for something more than its current state. Those of us who
are in Christ are, by the grace of God, slowly being transformed into that
*something more*. We are being made like God. This is the essential nature of
the process of sanctification: slow transformation from our current state into
the image of God. Sanctification is one of the most important ideas in the
Bible, and many things besides people were sanctified in the course of salvation
history. Sanctification is being set apart for service to God, being made "holy"
---including especially the various elements used in the pre-Christ sacrificial
system. This kind of holiness entails both moral uprightness and distinction
from the mundane.

We first recognize that moral failure is a reality---a sad and tragic reality,
but a reality nonetheless---in the life of the Christian. Even after
experiencing regeneration and justification, we remain *simultus justus et
peccator*, to borrow Luther's famous phrase: simultaneously justified and yet
sinners. We remain in the world *and* of the world, rather than in it but not of
it. We are not yet wholly set apart for God's works, but too often continue to
pursue fallen ends via fallen means. We need to be transformed so that we pursue
God's ends (ultimately: God himself) as he has called us, rather than the things
of the earth.

But God in his wisdom has ordained that we *grow* into this. We are justified at
a single moment by faith in Christ, and our sanctification will ultimately be
finished in a single moment when we are glorified upon our death. In the
interval, though, God has called us to pursue him, to strive for the holiness
which Christ exemplified for us. As we do, we learn to trust him more and rely
more thoroughly on his power and wisdom rather than our own, and this too is
part of the process of sanctification. When we are perfected, it will not be a
matter of suddenly being able to do on our own what we could not before, but
rather that we will finally depend wholly on God.

In this we are growing into the full maturity of humanity. Our model is Jesus
Christ: the God-man who shows us what it means to be a perfect human being. He
taught us over and over again not only by example but by direct affirmation that
his life was characterized above all by dependence on his Father and that he
acted not on his own power but that of the Spirit. In our sanctification, we
learn to walk the same way. As in our justification, this comes about because we
are being united to Christ by the indwelling Spirit---so our growing humanity is
also growing to participate in the life of the Trinity. We pursue the Father and
his ways, empowered by the Spirit to partake of Christ's risen, divinized
humanity.

This way of putting it is often jarring to western theologians, but is fully
orthodox and has been part of the Eastern Orthodox tradition for sixteen
centuries and more. It draws directly on the language of 2 Peter 1:4, which
reminds us that we are partakers of the divine nature. It was on that very basis
that Peter laid out his enjoinder to grow in the various measures of
sanctification: faith, virtue, knowledge, self-control, steadfastness,
godliness, brotherly affection, and love (a list that bears what is surely not a
coincidental similarity to Paul's fruit of the Spirit). Sanctification is our
wholehearted pursuit of the things of God, not on our own power but by his
gracious work in us, until we someday attain to full maturity and depend wholly
on the Spirit's uniting us to Christ.
