Title: Sufficiency and Efficacy
Author: Chris Krycho
Date: 2014-02-25 08:30
Topic: Did Jesus atone for the sins of every person, or just those who becom Christians?
Category: theology
Tags: [M. Div., SEBTS]
Class: Christian Theology II
Professor: Dr. Steve McKinion
School: Southeastern Baptist Theological Seminary
Template: formats/class
Summary: It is most appropriate to speak of Jesus' atonement as unlimited in extent but limited in effect.

The extent of the atonement is one of the most debated topics in the history of
the church for centuries. Whether Jesus Christ's death provided substition for
the sins of all people or just some has been the cause of many dissensions and
denominational splits in the Protestant world ever since the Reformation. Most
famously, Arminius and his followers were expelled from the Calvinistic churches
over this very issue and the way they worked out their stance in other areas of
doctrine.

For the most part, though, what is at issue is not whether Jesus' death was of
sufficient merit to save all people. Jesus the incarnate Son of God provided a
sacrifice of infinite worth, undoubtedly of sufficient worth to cover all the
sins of all mankind in all of history. Rather, the question is to whom the
atonement is applied and how---or, to put it differently, to whom its benefits
are available. Thus, the phrases of "limited atonement" and "unlimited
atonement" are best understood as referring to the availability and effect of
the atonement, *not* to its value.

Second, it must be recognized that all orthodox Christians affirm that the
effects of the atonement are limited in at least one important sense: not all
people are redeemed, and therefore not all people benefit from the atonement of
Christ. To put it as many have before, all orthodox believers affirm that the
atonement was "sufficient for all, but efficient for some," for if it was
"efficient" for all, then all would be saved. (To affirm any lesser effect is to
diminish the atonement. This is not to say that there may not be other, broader
effects of Christ's death on the cross---e.g. the notion of prevenient grace
enabling all to respond to the preached word---only that the atonement itself is
not applied universally.) The question then is only who those "some" are and the
terms under which the atonement is available to them.

The simplest answer is simply to say, "the elect!" and have done, leaving aside
the tendentious question of who is elect---but this question is precisely where
the rubber meets the road on the issue of the atonement. After all, everyone
agrees that the only the sins of those who believe are actually removed in
Christ, regardless of how election works out. Thus, when people speak of
"limited" or "unlimited" atonement, they are usually speaking of the issue of
general or specific election. Does the work of Christ mean that all are equally
able to hear and respond to the gospel, or does it mean that only the elect are
enabled to hear and respond?

I think the most faithful articulation of the matter is to speak of the
atonement in three ways. First, we affirm that Jesus' death was sufficient to
atone for the sins of the world---*all* the world. Second, we offer the
atonement freely to everyone. Although the only the elect will be saved (however
we understand that to play out), the Scriptures clearly enjoin us to proclaim
Christ's subtitutionary death and justifying resurrection to sinners everywhere
and to urge everyone to repent and trust in him. Third, we affirm that the
saving work of the atonement is applied to the sins of those who confess Christ
as Savior and Lord and obey him. We need not perfectly understand or agree upon
the means by which people come to confess Christ as Lord to affirm that it is
only in that affirmation and obedience that one's sins are covered in the
atonement.

It is thus most appropriate to speak of Jesus' atonement as unlimited in extent
but limited in effect.