Title: The Mother of God
Author: Chris Krycho
Date: 2014-02-04 08:30
Topic: Is is appropriate to call Mary the "Mother of God"?
Description: Is it right to call Mary the Mother of God? The historic, orthodox answer is a resounding &ldquo;yes&rdquo;&mdash;though a clearly qualified and well articulated &ldquo;yes.&rdquo;
Tags: M.&hairsp;Div.
Class: Christian Theology II
Professor: Dr. Steve McKinion
Template: formats/class

Is it right to call Mary the Mother of God? The historic, orthodox answer is a
resounding "yes"---though a clearly qualified and well articulated "yes." This
is not just the historic, orthodox position; it is the *right* position. Mary
was indeed the "mother of God". She was the mother of Jesus. Jesus was (and is)
fully God *and* fully man, completely and truly, both at once without loss of
the full measure of either. He did not cease being totally divine upon his
incarnation, but he did assume full humanity. The argument is as simple as it
first seems: Mary is the mother of Jesus, and Jesus is God, therefore Mary is
the mother of God.

Evangelicals tend to shy away from following the broader tradition and affirming
that Mary is the mother of God. There are many reasons for this, not least our
general discomfort with things having to do with Mary born of the over-
referencing of Mary in the Catholic tradition and the actual Mariolatry that is
too often evinced in Catholic lay practice throughout the world. However, our
response ought not be to reject this view, but to speak carefully and clearly
and reject what is mistaken while keeping what is true.

It is true that we must be nuanced in our handling of this issue. The word
"mother" brings with it implications that we must avoid, and we must remember
Jesus' statements on what it meant to be his mother and brothers and sisters in
the gospels (i.e. that those who followed him were those really deserving of the
titles). However, simply to set aside the title is to lose important aspects of
the reality of the incarnation. If we say that Mary was *not* the mother of God,
we are really saying either that she was not truly the mother of Jesus, or that
Jesus was not fully God. Neither of these is a tolerable option.

Now, to those qualifications. When we say that Mary is the mother of God, we are
not saying that God in any sense has his source in her. All of the humanity of
Jesus finds its source equally in Mary and in the Spirit's divine intervention
---but Mary was created by the Son, rather than the Son originating in her. Mary
is the mother of God in Christ, but she is not to the Son exactly as ordinary
mothers are to ordinary sons, for Jesus was not an ordinary son.

Nor do we mean that Mary has special prerogatives because of her relationship to
Jesus. As noted above, Jesus made clear that he was concerned above all with
obedience to the will of God (see e.g. Matthew 12:46--50). Thus, the devotions
offered to Mary by our Catholic and Eastern Orthodox brothers and sisters is
misplaced, as is the notion that her prayers are somehow more effective in
touching Jesus' heart than are those of the ordinary saint who is seeking to
honor God.

These qualifications notwithstanding, we must still be willing and ready to
affirm that Mary was in fact the Mother of God. To do otherwise is to reduce in
one way or another the mystery of the incarnation. It is not so much that *Mary*
is important here as that affirming her motherhood of God helps us affirm the
important points to which we must hold fast in terms the full deity and full
humanity of *Christ*. Mary is important because Jesus humanity came by means of
Mary's body. Everything that it is to be man, Jesus always was from conception,
and everything that it is to be God, Jesus always was from the moment of his
conception.