---
Title: The Servant of God
Subtitle: Israel, Isaiah, and Jesus Christ
Author: Chris Krycho
Date: 2014-03-11 15:45
Class: Old Testament II
Professor: Dr. Heath Thomas
School: Southeastern Baptist Theological Seminary
Template: formats/class
Category: theology
Tags: [M. Div., SEBTS]
---

The Servant pictured in Isaiah is one of the most famous images in the Old
Testament for Christians. The language applied to him in Isaiah 53 in particular
has long been understood by Christians to point directly to Jesus as the atoning
savior. The role of the Servant in the book is somewhat more complex than a
simple prediction of Jesus as subtitutionary atonement however: it encompasses
that idea, but does much more as well.

The label of Servant is applied to two (or possibly three) different roles in
Isaiah: the nation of Israel, and one who suffers and works on behalf of Israel.
This latter role certainly contains messianic overtures, but may also include
poetic references to Isaiah's own suffering on behalf Israel.

The theme of the Servant first appears in chapter 40, and is immediately and
directly applied in reference to Israel/Jacob. The same is true of its
appearance in chapters 41 and 43, though the language used of the servant in
chapter 42 suggests an individual and not the nation, and should perhaps be
taken as pointing to a king who represents the nation given the national
context. Beginning in chapter 45 and moving forward, the Servant increasingly
appears as the individual who acts for Israel on Yahweh's behalf.

Whether the Servant-Israel or the Servant-for-Israel (as we might label them),
the Servant exists to be God's agent in bringing about the obedience of the
nations. The Servant-Israel experiences cleansing and purification to that end,
while the Servant-for-Israel experiences suffering in place of Israel, for her
sins and to save her from her unrighteous ways.[^1] In both cases, the suffering
is part of God's plan to lead the nations out of their idolatry to participate
in his covenant with Israel. The shape of the role taken by the Servant differs,
though, and as the book progresses the need for the Servant-for-Israel becomes
more and more clear, because the Servant-Israel is simply not up to the task (as
was made clear by the first 39 chapters of the book!).

Thus, the Servant-for-Israel acts on behalf of Israel in the latter parts of
chapters 40--55. He picks up kingly responsibilities of doing justice and
righteousness in the earth (a theme Isaiah seems to take up from the Psalms and
elaborate). He stands as Israel's representative in dealing with her sin. He
brings the nations in to participate in Israel's covenant life with God. In some
sense, the messianic king figure becomes True Israel on Israel's behalf.

The transition between Servant-Israel and Servant-for-Israel not only picks up
messianic overtones, but also hints at autobiographical elements for Isaiah
himself. Lest Christian readers be skittish at this notion, wanting to preserve
the text's unique way of pointing to Jesus: it is hardly uncommon for figures in
the Old Testament to prefigure the messiah in various ways. Here it is Jesus'
role as Prophet we see prefigured, just asthe entire Levitical system prefigured
him as Priest and David prefigured him as King. Isaiah's suffering on behalf of
Israel is a clear parallel to Jesus' ministry, and Jesus himself makes this
clear in his teaching in the New Testament, where he emphasizes that he came in
part to close eyes and ears as well as open them.

The result of the progression is that the reader moves from seeing Israel as
God's servant to recognizing the need for a servant who will work as God's agent
on Israel's behalf, to seeing that even Isaiah was an incomplete picture of this
servant. The one of whom Isaiah prophesied would be not only Prophet but also
king and both priest and sacrifice on behalf of the people. He would not only
speak of the nations coming to participate in fellowship with God in the Zion of
Israel, he would bring it about himself.

[^1]: Notably, the redemption pictured in Isaiah goes beyond subtitution for
sins, and includes restoration to a holy nature---a theme that is picked up
clearly in the New Testament but too often overlooked by modern readers.
