---
Title: The Resurrection is Essential
Author: Chris Krycho
Date: 2014-03-18 08:00
Topic: Why was the resurrection of Jesus necessary for salvation?
Category: theology
Tags: [M. Div., SEBTS]
Class: Christian Theology II
Professor: Dr. Steve McKinion
School: Southeastern Baptist Theological Seminary
Template: formats/class
Summary: Without the resurrection, we are simply not saved. We are not justified, not delivered from death, and will not be resurrected.
---

Paul tells us that if Jesus was not raised from the dead, then we are still dead
in our trespasses (1 Corinthians 15:17). This simple statement uncovers a great
deal about the necessity of Christ's resurrection as well as his death on our
behalf, as does much of the rest of the New Testament's view of the
resurrection. Paul tells us, for example, that Christ died for our trespasses
and was raised for our justification (Romans 4:25). Likewise, he notes Jesus'
resurrection from the dead is intrinsically linked to our own life (e.g. Romans
8:11). Moreover, we know that if Jesus was not raised from the dead, then
neither will we be (1 Corinthians 15:16). We know that it was in the
resurrection that Jesus was shown to be the Son of God in power (Romans 1:4) and
thus the one who reigns over all things. Moreover, we note that the preaching of
the apostles as recorded in Acts refers to the resurrection of Christ as the
evidence that he is indeed the Jewish messiah and the judge of the earth---
indeed, from Acts we see that the apostolic message *centered* on the
resurrection of Christ. Likewise, the very shape of the gospels is such that
each in its own way climaxes not with Jesus' death but with his resurrection, as
if to say that the central issue of our faith is not the death of Christ but his
being raised from the dead.

As we put together all these pieces, it becomes clear that the resurrection is
integral in our salvation. It is not merely the "seal" upon the work Jesus did
at the cross, the evidence that the cross accomplished what it needed to. It is
part and parcel of our salvation, in and of itself. It is true that the
resurrection does indeed ratify the elements of the saving work of Christ that
were accomplished on the cross, but this is not all that it does. It seems clear
from the evidence of the New Testament that the resurrection itself is
efficacious in saving us.

If our mortal bodies are corrupted by sin, as we know they are, and if the
penalty of sin is death, as we know it is, then something more than payment for
sin must happen. Payment for sin is necessary, and so Jesus' substitutionary
atonement in death on the cross is essential to our salvation. However, there is
more that is essential to our salvation. Reconciliation between God and man
began in the Incarnation, as in Jesus the Son of God united humanity and deity
in perfect fellowship once again, and it was accomplished (though not yet
finished) in the resurrection as Jesus took up a restored body in which the
power of sin and death were finally broken: an image of what our bodies will be
in the age to come.

Likewise, we know that if we die as things were before the Resurrection, even
were our sins paid for, we remain mortal and would never rise again of our own
merits. In his resurrection, Jesus triumphed over death---the last enemy---and
we know that the same Spirit that raised him from the dead will raise us from
the dead. We know that Jesus' resurrection is the means of our justification. He
paid for our sins in his atoning death, but he sets us right with God in his
triumphant new life. We know that his reign as the rightful heir of all things
was inaugurated in his resurrection, not in his death.

In short, essential as was his death for our salvation, the resurrection of
Christ is no less important in our being restored to life with God.
