Author: Chris Krycho
Date: 2014-05-11 20:00
Title: The "New" Covenant
Summary: Although it is tempting to view the New Covenant promised by Jeremiah as marking a sharp break with what came before, a careful reading of the text points us in another direction.
Category: theology
Tags: M. Div., SEBTS
Template: formats/class
Professor: Dr. Heath Thomas
School: Southeastern Baptist Theological Seminary

It is common for pastors, popular teachers, and even some scholars to treat the
'New Covenant' of Jeremiah 31 as something wholly distinct from the previous
covenants. In this reading, the New Covenant is specific to the work of Christ
in the New Testament age, and was never experienced by any "Old Testament
believers". Those believers remained under the previous (Abrahamic and
especially Mosaic and Davidic) covenants, while New Testament believers are New
Covenant believers. For this view, they draw on the ways that the New Covenant
language was picked up by the authors of the New Testament, especially in
Hebrews.

Though this reading has an ancient pedigree, going back at least as far as
Jerome, it is ultimately incorrect. First, it fails to take the content of
Jeremiah's vision on its own terms. As Jeremiah traces out his vision of the
New Covenant in chapters 31--33, he explicitly includes the language of
law-keeping, temple working and priests, and a Davidic king over the land of
Israel. These were not merely symbolic expectations, but fully fleshed out
hopes for and visions of a restoration of the covenant God made with Israel at
Sinai. Indeed, the terms of priestly temple sacrifice and law-keeping used
throughout the section presuppose the covenant language of Deuteronomy and the
discussion in Deuteronomy 30 of the circumcised heart. Thus, Hill and Walton
note (and likewise Thomas suggested) that in many ways it is more appropriate
to speak of a *renewed* covenant than of a totally *new* covenant.

Second, the reading of the 'New Covenant' as *wholly* new misses the ways the
other authors of the Old Testament responded to this promise. In particular,
Ezra's prayer in Ezra-Nehemiah makes it abundantly clear that he considered the
people's return to the land after their 70-year-exile a fulfillment of the
prophecy. If it was not a complete fulfillment---as indeed that same prayer
acknowledges, for the people's hearts were still wayward---it nonetheless
represented at least a partial fulfillment. There were once again Jewish people
living in the land, performing temple sacrifice and following Yahweh. Though
the Davidic king had not yet been reinstated, and though the people's hearts
had not yet had the law so thoroughly stamped on them that they no longer
needed teachers, the promise was partly fulfilled.

Third, even in the age after Christ's coming it is clear that the vision
remains only fulfilled in part. True: there was a significant break in the
shape of history in the incarnation, life, death, resurrection, and ascension
of the Son. Yet God's law is not yet written so thoroughly on anyone's heart
that no man needs to teach his neighbor. Christians still wrestle with sin.
Moreover, as the author of Hebrews notes, this Davidic king who fulfills the
New Covenant hopes has not yet put everything in subjection under his feet
(Heb. 2). He is seated at the right hand of God, exalted above the heavens, and
has inaugurated his reign, but he has not yet *consummated* reign. The same
author who affirms so strongly that Jesus is the fulfillment of the New
Covenant hope affirms as well that the New Covenant is not yet fully completed.
The ancient Jews lived in an "already but not yet" after the return from Exile.
In the work of Christ, that "already" is significantly advanced---but the "not
yet" remains until he returns.

This is not to say that there is *nothing* new about the New Covenant. Unlike
in Deuteronomy 30, where the people were enjoined to repent and circumcise
their own hearts, the work in Jeremiah's vision is wholly God's. Too, the New
Testament's embrace of New Covenant language in terms of Jesus' work means that
Christians *should* understand that something new has happened in Christ.
Specifically, Christ has done what Israel could not. Jesus kept the law
perfectly, needing no one to teach him; he served as both priest and sacrifice
to make atonement for the sins of the people; he rules and judges righteously
as the Davidic Branch who represents Yahweh; he even reconstituted Israel in
his twelve disciples. Jesus Messiah *is* the fulfillment of the New Covenant.
He is the hope toward which the Old Testament saints looked.

Augustine, not Jerome, had the right of it. All the Old Testament saints were
participants in the New Covenant. They looked forward to that which they did
not see, but they too were saved by faith in Christ. They did not have the full
revelation with which New Testament saints are blessed. They saw from far off
that of which Christians now enjoy the fullness. But Jesus' work in bringing
about the New Covenant was not something foreign to the covenants that had gone
before; it was the fulfillment of all of them. Here was the offspring of the
woman who would crush the serpent's head, the offspring of Abraham in whom all
nations would be blessed, the prophet like Moses who would give the law anew,
the true Israel who would keep the law rightly, the offspring of David who
would do justice for his people and for the nations. Jeremiah's New Covenant
promised the fulfillment of what had gone before. It was new in that Jesus
finally accomplished what no Israelite ever had. It was the renewal of the old
in that what Jesus accomplished was precisely the hope set before Israel from
the beginning.
