Author: Chris Krycho
Class: Christian Theology II
Professor: Dr. Steve McKinion
School: Southeastern Baptist Theological Seminary
Date: 2014-05-03 14:00
Category: theology
Tags: M. Div., SEBTS
Title: The Spirit's Work in Conversion (redux)
Description: The Spirit brought about the Incarnation, and raised Jesus from the dead; now the Spirit makes the Son's work efficacious in the hearts of believers. The Father originated the work of salvation; the Son was and is the means of salvation; the Spirit is the one who guarantees and accomplishes salvation.
Template: formats/class

The Holy Spirit's work in conversion, as in all the works of the Spirit, is the
part of executing the will of the Father in the person of the Son. The Spirit
brought about the Incarnation, and raised Jesus from the dead; now the Spirit
makes the Son's work efficacious in the hearts of believers. The Father
originated the work of salvation; the Son (in his incarnation, life, death,
resurrection, and ascension) was and is the means of salvation; the Spirit is
the one who guarantees and accomplishes salvation.

To begin, the Spirit opens unbelievers' eyes to their need for salvation.
Sinners apart from the Spirit are lost and hopeless, with either no awareness of
need for God (passivity) or an active rejection of God (rebellion). The Spirit
opens an unregenerate individual to see his need for salvation, providing an
awareness of sinfulness and separation from God, and prompting desire for
restored relationship and righteousness. This all happens in the preaching of
the gospel, which the Spirit makes effective in the person's mind---even as the
Spirit was responsible for the existence of the gospel in Scripture to begin
with. Thus the Spirit inspired the words of the gospel and then brings them to
fruition: the Spirit is executor of God's will.

Moreover, the Spirit enables faith in Jesus Christ as the resurrected Son of
God, as savior and lord.[^1] In this recognition of one's need and decisive
change in the will---toward rather than away from God---the Spirit brings about
the regeneration of the human heart. Regeneration unites the new believer to
Jesus Christ: he comes to participate in the Son's perfected, divinized
humanity. Indeed, believers "become partakers of the divine nature" (2 Peter
1:4). Where once the believer's heart rejected God, God now appears good and
delightful and worthy of worship and trust. Where once one thought nothing of
engaging in sin, one now increasingly hates and rejects sin and strives to sin
no more. The Spirit replaces a heart of stone with a heart of flesh, and moves
believers from darkness to light.

Having accomplished the salvation of an individual soul, the Spirit brings the
believer into the community of faith. No person's salvation is singular or
independent. Maturity and completion happen as one participates in the
restoration of relationship not only with God but with other human beings. The
people of God all participate *together* through the Spirit in Jesus the Son. It
is the Spirit who makes the people of God the body of Christ. And the Spirit
seals the people of God for redemption, keeping them steadfast in their faith as
they build one another up through fellowship and the proclamation of the word
and participation in the ordinances---all of which are Spirit-empowered to
continue God's gracious work in the believer's life, leading ultimately to final
salvation.

[^1]: Believers have differed on the particulars of this enabling throughout
    history, but all affirm that the Spirit does indeed enable faith as a
    minimum assertion. My own position is that the Spirit does not only *enable*
    faith but *supplies* it to hearts which would otherwise reject God. That is,
    the Spirit is not merely the ultimate ground but also the proximate cause of
    regeneration.