Title: When My Great-(×80)-Grandparents Lived
Description: We read dusty, ancient words and find they speak to us. This reality is one of the great, miraculous works of the Spirit. We should pay closer attention to it.
Date: 2014-04-03 06:50
Author: Chris Krycho
Tags: devotions
Category: theology
Passages: Psalm 70, Proverbs 3, and 2 Corinthians 7&ndash;9
Template: formats/devotions

One of the more astonishing doctrines we Christians advance is the idea that
documents written to a group of people almost wholly other than us millennia ago
are relevant to our own lives today. Today, for example, I read from 2
Corinthians (mid first century A.D.), Proverbs (written early in the 10th
century B.C. and mostly likely compiled into its final form sometime around the
6th century B.C.), and Psalms (similar to Proverbs, perhaps in this particular
case with a slightly earlier date of composition and later date of completion).
In other words, I am reading a words penned anywhere from about 3,000 to about
2,000 years ago.

About twenty years separate me from my father, and he from his. A "generation"
is something like twenty to twenty-five years. Call it twenty-five for good
measure. Then it has been between 80 and 120 human lives since these books were
written. That distance in time is almost unfathomable.[^1] And yet we have the
audacity to say the Paul's letters, Solomon's proverbs, and David's poetry have
something to say to us today. More than that, we claim that God expressly
intended that we read these books as his revelation of himself to us *today*.
Not, to be sure, in the sense that we act as if 2 Corinthians is a letter
addressed to us (though I have heard this articulation bandied around in
simplistic fashion, usually in the context of trying to motivate people into
reading their Bibles) but in the sense that God's work in *those* people's lives
at *that* time was recorded in such a way as to be a comprehensible revelation
of the character and desires of the living God whom we serve *today*.

We are not without warrant in making this claim. Those intervening centuries
have seen the church flourish and grow under the guidance of the Scriptures, and
never more so than when listening most carefully to the ways God has revealed
himself in the Scriptures themselves. New light is *always* shining forth into
the church from these ancient pages, because the Spirit of God is always at work
using these old words to confront new people.

There are two realities here: a lesser and a greater one. The lesser is that
people have not changed. Many of the particulars of our circumstances have, of
course. I read these words from a tablet this morning, and I am typing on a
laptop---a pair of devices that certainly would have astounded anyone in the
original audiences. Modernity is extraordinarily different from all that
preceded it *many* ways. But these are mere externals; the human heart is the
same as it has ever been. We are still troubled, broken, rebels against the King
of the universe, desperately in need of salvation from both the guilt and the
power of sin in our lives and of reconciliation with our maker and with each
other.

The greater reality is that God has not changed, and it is the Holy Spirit that
makes these vintage texts work life among us. The same God who put his breath in
man put his breath in these texts[^2] He breathes through them into the life of
his people today, so that what was said then means something now. This is
miraculous on many levels: that the words penned then were able to be profitable
for so long, that they were so well preserved, and that we are enabled to hear
them. The work of the Spirit is often reduced to his visibly and obviously
miraculous doings---healings, tongues, etc.---but I think this is one of the
greatest works done at the Spirit's hand. This reality leads us to worship, as
it should, and as it is meant to.

[^1]: If we write out all the greats in the chain back to my ancestors who lived
    when these words were being written, the *shorter* version comes to this:
    roughly my great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-great-grandparents
    were walking around then.

[^2]: We translate from the Greek *theopneustos* to "inspired" because the
    Authorized Version did---but "God-breathed" would be equally accurate. That
    is exactly what "inspired by God" meant when King James was alive: to be
    "inspired" is simply to be breathed into, from Latin *in-* ('in/into') +
    *spirare* ('breathe').
