---
Title: How I Became a Runner
Subtitle: "Or: That Time I Got Mono and Couldn't Play Ultimate Anymore"
Series:
  Title: On Running
  Part: 1
Date: 2015-10-12 20:00
...

Sometime in the last few years, I became "that runner guy." It is no longer strange for me to introduce myself to someone new in the area we live, and hear them say, "Have I seen you running?" I smile and nod: "Yep, that's me." And to be fair, I do run a lot: six days a week, most weeks, always at least half an hour. In three weeks, I'll run my seventh half marathon,[^7th] and I finished my first triathlon last summer. So, yes, I do run a lot.

But it's still a little strange to me. I came to running late, and in a roundabout way. Many of my friends ran cross country in high school; I played football (and poorly at that) instead. I ran off and on in college in a (mostly failing) attempt to stay in shape and avoid college weight. The only running I did consistently was playing Ultimate on Fridays with some friends. For the first year I was out of college, my routine was much the same.

And then I got mono. I drank after a friend who carries around a particularly virulent strain of it, and was down for the count: a month in bed, and two months of recovery after that. I was, in theory, the captain of a church league Ultimate team that spring. I missed half the games, and even when I was able to attend some of them in the latter half of the season, it left me literally needing a nap just to stand and watch for an hour. In the hopes of being back in good enough shape to play the following fall, I started running as soon as I was cleared by the doctor.

That first run on a treadmill in May 2010 was painfully slow. Even when I was furthest out of shape before that, running an 8-minute mile had been doable---painful, perhaps, but doable. That day I ran a 12-minute mile, and was done for the day. The same thing another day that week. And again.

But slowly, over time, I built up my endurance. I managed to run two miles outside a few weeks later. By the time Ultimate season rolled around in late August, I could run five miles, and was doing three to five miles four times a week. I was in good enough shape to play Ultimate, and I enjoyed it.

Still, I found running hard, and didn't particularly enjoy it. I ran solely as a means to the end of playing Ultimate. More, five miles was my upper limit if I ran hard (as I always did). When I thought about people who ran half-marathons---still less the full---I simply could not understand how they did it. But I started to *want* to understand.

And then I had one simple conversation, which changed my entire approach to running. It set me on a course to this seventh half-marathon, and to being "that runner guy" around here. It led to my being the healthiest I've ever been. And, strangest of all, it ended up with my *loving* to run---and not because I like pain.

But more on that next time.

[^7th]: Dallas White Rock 2011, Oklahoma City 2012, Fort Worth 2012, one whose name I can't remember in April 2013, City of Oaks 2013, City of Oaks 2014.