---
Title: Strong-Group Cultures are Broken, Too
Subtitle: Thoughts on <cite>When the Church Was a Family</cite>
Date: 2015-05-28 17:25
Tags: M. Div., SEBTS
Description: >
    Joseph D. Hellerman's The Church Was a Family has some great things  to say,
    but he profoundly overstates the extent to which the Bible affirms
    "strong-group" (or indeed, any human) cultures.
Template: formats/class
Class: Christian Theology III
Professor: Dr. Keith Whitfield
School: Southeastern Baptist Theological Seminary
...

In *When the Church Was a Family*, Joseph D. Hellerman argues that the health of
the church depends on embracing what he describes as a strong-group culture
mentality. Based on insights from sociology, he maintains that the "family"
language of Scripture, and especially that of the New Testament, should lead
believers to embrace the same kind of cultural norms that characterized families
in the ancient Mediterranean world where the Bible was written. He first
explains how that strong-group culture works, contrasting it with the
individualistic (or “weak-group”) culture of the west: individual desires are
sublimated to those of the group, and decisions are made both within the context
of the group and with the good of the group foremost. He then defends the idea
that this was how the New Testament church community was structured, before
turning to a general discussion of how the practice of the Western church might
need to change to accommodate this kind of cultural shift. In this practical
turn, Hellerman considers a number of cases studies for how this has played out
in his experience, as well as the implications for leadership.

While Hellerman's argument has much to recommend it on the whole, his treatment
of the Bible's relationship to strong- and weak-group cultures leaves a great
deal to be desired. Granted that the Bible clearly rejects the kind of radical
individualism that characterizes contemporary evangelicalism, and granted
further that Hellerman rightly emphasizes the communal and familial language of
the New Testament in particular, nonetheless he substantially overstates the
case for “strong-group” communities, and in doing so partly undermines an
otherwise strong and helpful book. Hellerman repeatedly argues that the Bible
clearly and unabashedly appropriates and affirms the strong-group culture of the
surrounding world. This is the thesis with which he opens the book, and he
dedicates the first half of the book to defending it from the pages of Scripture
and the early years of church history.

Unfortunately, Hellerman’s thesis cannot be sustained—at least, not as he
presents it. Scripture does appropriate at times from the strong-group ideas of
the surrounding culture at times, but it never does so unreservedly, and it
often corrects those ideas. First, while Hellerman argues repeatedly and at
great length that the dominant understanding of group identity and especially
family from the surrounding culture presented patrilineal family groups as
primary, and sibling identity as trumping all others, including those from
marriage, God rejects that approach to the family itself from the earliest pages
of Scripture. Very much *unlike* the culture Hellerman praises, with its
prioritizing of blood families over a spouse, Genesis clarifies that the pattern
for God’s people is that the new relationship formed in marriage takes first
place (Gen. 2:24; cf. Eph. 5:31). Likewise, many of the very passages that
Hellerman cites as evidence for the strength of the new community Jesus formed
among his followers—and especially the most challenging passages where Jesus
speaks of hating father and mother and siblings for his sake—implicitly
undermine the surrounding culture’s understanding of community and systems.
Hellerman rightly sees that these passages emphasized the commitment the new
Christ-followers were to have to the eschatological community; he misses the
inherent critique of the existing structures.

The same pattern plays out in Hellerman’s readings of Acts, the Epistles, and
early church history. Regarding Acts, for example, he asserts:

> The radical discipline Ananias and Sapphira experienced at the hand of God
> demonstrates that the collectivist ‘group comes first’ conviction constitutes
> a central principle for New Testament social ethics. To lie about this aspect
> of discipleship is to undermine the very foundation for the community God is
> building.

In reality, as the passage itself makes clear, their sin was *lying to the Holy
Spirit*. The issue of communal responsibility was irrelevant—except, perhaps,
insofar as it provoked them to act in a way that would garner group approval. In
his treatment of the Epistles, Hellerman asserts but does not demonstrate that
the writers approved of their culture’s view of family. Yes, the early
Christians called each other brother and sister; no, they did not necessarily
therefore affirm everything their culture meant in that. That the church
constitutes a family is clear; that that family should behave in line with the
honor-driven, insular fashion of the New Testament world is not. Ancient
Mediterranean families would cut off those who stumbled and shamed them; the
church gave succor to just those people. Similarly, he takes the consistent
testimony to Christian love in the history of the early church as evidence for
his theme. In fact, many of the examples he cites serve to demonstrate just how
broken the surrounding strong-group cultures were, and how the church thrived by
forging a *different* way. In all of this, Hellerman repeatedly fails to
acknowledge how thoroughly the work of God has been a work of *both* the group
and the individual. Both Old or New Testament resound with stories of personal
success and failure side by side with those of God’s people. The Biblical
picture is *both-and*: individuals mutually serving each other and giving
themselves up for each other, but not in the process losing their individuality
or the unique insight and vision God has given them.

Unfortunately, it is clear that Hellerman’s thesis drives his exegesis—he never
even considers evidence that might right contrary to his thesis. This is too
bad. Hellerman’s claim that the Western church needs a healthy dose of
strong-group thinking does not stand or fall with the idea that strong-group
culture is God’s preferred culture. Indeed, his argument would have been much
stronger had he acknowledged the ways that God’s new culture takes the best of
strong-group culture (as it does the best of weak-group culture!) and forms it
into something new and better. Indeed, the Western church *does* need to retreat
from its comfort in highly individualistic, weak-group cultures. American
evangelicals have a great deal to learn from strong-group cultures—whether those
in the pages of the New Testament, or those of many Majority World cultures.
Recovery of the kinds of values Hellerman outlines, and their practical
application, will indeed be necessary for thriving and healthy churches. But
Hellerman’s approach fails to take seriously the ways in which *all* human
cultures are broken, strong- and weak-group alike. Hellerman knows the
weaknesses of weak-group cultures quite well; whether he has ever seen the
failings of strong-group cultures up close seems doubtful given his lavish
praise of those cultures and how little good he has to say of weak-group
cultures.
